---
layout: post
title: BART with varying intercepts in the MRP framework
tags: [MRP, BART, BARP]
---

This is the first of a few posts about some of the substantive and modeling findings from my masters thesis, where I use Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (BART) and Poststratification to model support for a border wall from 2015-2019. In this post I explore some of the properties of BART with varying intercepts (BART-vi) , an extension of BART made possible by Vincent Dorie's dbarts [dbarts](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/dbarts/) R package.

<!--more-->

Andrew Gelman calls this RRP: Regularized Regression and Poststratification.

First, I'll provide a super brief overview of the MRP framework for obtaining accurate population level estimates from sample surveys. Next, I'll explain BART, and how BART-vi extends the model. Finally, I'll build one model of each type, and compare them.

## A Quick Review of Multilevel Regression and Poststratification

While I'm mostly focused on the modeling step with this post, here's a quick review of the steps in building a MRP/RRP model. If you want a fuller introduction, Kastellec's [MRP Primer](https://scholar.princeton.edu/jkastellec/publications) is a great starting point.

MRP or RRP cast estimation of a population quantity of interest $\theta$ as a prediction problem. That is, instead of the more traditional approach of attempting to design the initial survey to be representative of the population, MRP leans more heavily on modeling and poststratification to make the estimates representative.

While there are multiple ways to create MRP estimates, introductory resources such as \cite{hanrettyIntroductionMultilevelRegression2019,kastellecEstimatingStatePublic,kennedyKnowYourPopulation2019} prefer to describe the steps as follows:

\begin{enumerate}
  \item Either gather or run a survey or collection of surveys that collect both information on the outcome of interest, $y$, and a set of demographic and geographic predictors, $\left(X_{1}, X_{2}, X_{3}, \ldots, X_{m}\right)$.
  \item Build a poststratification table, with population counts or estimated population counts $N_{j}$ for each possible combination of the features gathered above. Each possible combination $j$ is called a cell, one of $J$ possible cells. For example, if we stratified only on state, there would be $J=51$ (with DC) total cells; in practice, $J$ is often several thousand.
  \item Build a model, usually a bayesian multilevel regression, to predict $y$ using the demographic characteristic from the survey or set of surveys, estimating model parameters along the way.
  \item Estimate $y$ for each cell in the poststratification table, using the model built on the sample.
  \item Aggregate the cells to the population of interest, weighting by the $N_{j}$'s to obtain population level estimates:
  $$\theta_{\mathrm{POP}}=\frac{\sum_{j \in J} N_{j} \theta_{j}}{\sum_{j \in J} N_{J}}$$
  \end{enumerate}

## BART



## BART-vi

## Comparing the predictions of the two

## Next steps
